---
layout: post
title: "A bug Caused by Implicit Construction of std::string"
date: 2018-06-05
categories: 
  - "corcpp"
  - "programminglanguage"
---

Recently I met a bug when I was using google protobuf to serialize and deserialize messages.  
I have a code segment like this:

```cpp
class MyMessage; // A message class generated by protobuf</code>
void process() {
    MyMessage msg;
    std::string msg_buffer = some_other_func(); // receive binary format "string"
    msg.ParseFromString(msg_buffer.data());
}
```

In the code, there is a weird usage of `std::string::data()` and `MyMessage::ParseFromString()` API. It's a mistake due to my negligence. In the beginning, I use `MyMessage::ParseFromArray(const char*)` API and the type of `msg_buffer` is `std::vector`, so I use `std::vector::data()` to get a pointer in type of `const char*`.  When I was changing the parsing method from `ParseFromArray` to `ParseFromString`, I didn't think much about the argument of the new API `ParseFromString`.

These codes could pass compilation without any warning, even with compiler flag \-Wall . So I didn't realize that I made a mistake on the usage of the API. Then, the program crashed, which came from later codes that assume the msg object should have some specified data.

In fact, the API `MyMessage::ParseFromString()` never accepts an argument like const char \*. Since std::string has a non-explicit constructor basic\_string(const CharT \*, const Allocator &), the argument is implicitly converted to an std::string and passed into the function. However, the string constructed in this way is not what we want. Let's see a simple example.

```cpp
#include <string>
#include <cstdlib>
#include <cstdio>

size_t fake_strlen(const std::string & s) {
    return strlen(s.c_str());
}

int main() {
    std::string fraud_str = "I'm\0a fraud.";
    printf("length: %lu\n", fake_strlen(fraud_str.data()));
    return 0;
}

```

Compile and run the code above and you will get the output: 3. But the string has 12 bytes actually. Since there is a terminate char '\\0' in the C-style string (pointed by `const char*`), the newly constructed `std::string` will end with "I'm" and hold non-expected data.
